##Venture Capital Investors and Hedge Funds

Venture capital and private equity funds differ from mutual funds and hedge funds in a number of important ways. For one thing, the fund managers do not collect all their cash from investors up front. Instead, investors make commitments to provide a certain amount of cash over the five to seven year life of a typical fund with {tranches} of that cash being available on what's called a call basis, typically within 30 days of being called. So, a large institutional investor might make a $20 million commitment to a venture capital fund. And expect eight calls of $2.5 million each spread out over four to five years.

The reason for this structure is that venture capital and private equity investments take a long time to source, develop, and structure. And, often multiple investments will be made in the same company over a period of multiple years, up to five years. Prior to the money actually being needed by the investors, the outside sources of capital don’t want the money sitting around idle. They’d rather invest it elsewhere in liquid investments that can be cashed out quickly. Because investors are providing cash to the fund in various amounts over a period of several years, the best metric for evaluating performance of these types of funds is the internal rate of return, the discrete, compounded rate of return on just the money actually drawn by the funds.

Hedge funds have far fewer restrictions on what types of investments they can make than mutual funds for instance. Hedge funds are permitted to short, which means structuring a deal so that they can make money when a stock price goes down and to invest in many different types of assets, including options and derivatives. Hedge funds are not tied to a single sector universe. So it would not make sense to use a sector benchmark to evaluate them. In fact, to achieve maximum diversification, investors in hedge funds typically want hedge fund performance to have a low correlation to all the major equity markets.

A great hedge fund will be up in a bull market and up just as much in a bear market for equities. Of course the track record, a strong annual rate return over multiple years is a key metric; so is the Sharpe ratio. And because the holdings and working of hedge funds are less transparent than mutual funds, hedge fund investors are very wary of big drawdowns. Therefore, another key metric for hedge funds is the maximum drawdown from high water mark.

Though it may look impressive, if from 2005 to 2015, a hedge fund has an annualized rate of return of 15% per year but if there was a 30% draw-down, say during the big {bear} market in 2007, 2009, investors will think, I could have been the unlucky one who invested first right there. And so then I would have lost -30% of my money. Okay? So the reality with hedge funds is if they start to show losses in the 20, 25, and certainly 30% range, people start redeeming their money immediately and the hedge fund will generally collapse.

Metric related to maximum draw down from high water mark is years to break even. And the way to think about this is to identify the worst high to low loss over some time interval. And what we're looking at here is the SP 500 index from August 10, 2007 to May 20, 2015 and our worst loss would be from October 9, 2007 to March 9th, 2009 when the market was down 57%. Needless to say, no hedge fund would survive that kind of loss.


And then we calculate the annualized return from the beginning to the ends. So we're looking at the slope of this line, and this return would be 5%. And then we take the absolute value of the maximum drawdown, divided by the annualized return and that gives us a number, referred to as years to break even, which is the number of years at the average return that an investor would recover from the worst loss.


This of course, would assume that they entered the fund at the worst possible moment; but somebody will right, and you don't want it to be you. It's interesting to see that for the SP 500, the years to break even are over 11. Hedge funds need to have the years to break even in the two to three year range maximally, in order to continue to attract new investment.

Finally, to minimize correlation with equity markets, investors like to see a strong linear trend in the log value of wealth in a fund. If a fund is generating a steady, continually compounded return every day, its volatility of return would be zero and its internal linear correlation of time and log wealth would be one.