##Overview of 5 Types of Companies as they relate to Big Data

We've looked at how metrics are extracted from big data to improve business processes. And we've considered how people in different key jobs work with data. For the last part of our overview of the big data ecosystem, we'll identify the leading companies in the US market that are shaping the new big data culture.

But first, just to get oriented, we've organized all US companies into five groups. The five groups are ranked from least to most reliant upon proprietary software intellectual property for their business advantage. In other words, they are ranked from most likely to least likely to be hiring for entry level business analyst positions, as opposed to be hiring for more technical software development roles. These rankings are explained in detail on the illustration that accompanies these lectures.

The first group of the five are the traditional strategic business consulting firms. Their business model is that they are paid for advice. They generally focus on ways to improve business processes: increase revenues, maximize profitability, and reduce risk.

The second group is by far the largest, traditional businesses in all market sectors. These are often referred to as brick-and-mortar companies in contrast to digital companies that compete in the same markets but with completely different business models, and often with much lower cost structures. All that brick and mortar costs a lot of money. Many sectors of the traditional economy, such as retail, big box stores, banking and payment processing, financial advisors, taxis, hotels, are facing dangerous competition from digital companies. We'll identify signs that companies are fighting back effectively, and indications that they are lagging behind.

The third group are a small number of strategic business consulting firms that also recommend business process changes, but they specialize in building or installing custom software systems to implement their recommendations. These firms have outsize influence on the market for data analytics, because Fortune 500 companies tend to follow their advice.

The fourth group are hardware and software companies. These are the critical companies that together provide the products, and services to gather, store, manage, search, process, analyze, visualize and report the world's data. We'll discuss the various subsectors of the big data information technology sector in depth.

Finally, the fifth group are the digital companies. They compete primarily against established players in traditional markets. Like providing taxi service, rooms to rent for the night, business and consumer loans, retail shopping, movies, opportunities for communication and social connection but without the fixed costs of their bricks-and-mortar competitors. Digital companies also create market sectors with no real equivalent before the internet, like Google and search or eBay and online auctions. All digital companies rely upon massive data processing, generally enhanced by machine learning systems to make real-time decisions. At the heart of their value proposition is business analytics.