##Hardware and Software Companies

Hardware and software companies have use for a few business data analysts and data scientists but their primary need is for skilled software engineers and technical project managers. Their company's value depends upon the efficient development and delivery of proprietary technology.

Hardware and software have unusual price dynamics. Technology has high fixed costs to develop, and variable costs that are often close to zero. The first salable copy of a complex enterprise software application might cost US$5 million to develop. But the second copy, and every additional copy, might cost a penny, essentially. A new semiconductor chip may be fab-produced in a fabrication plant that costs US$5 billion to build, but the variable cost of a single chip off of that assembly line is only the cost of the raw material, maybe a few cents worth of clean sand.

Big data culture is possible only because of today's extremely low costs for storing and processing electronic information. Today's absurdly low computing costs are the result of 50 years of ferocious price wars in commercial hardware and software markets; markets that are driven by the unusual dynamic of high fixed cost and very low variable costs. Price wars tend to drive any commodity, product, or service down to prices close to variable cost. In other words, most market participants lose money, few survive. Personally, I've seen a million-fold decrease in data storage costs in my career.

In 1993, the year I launched my first software company, I was invited to visit what was then the largest commercial database in the world owned by Mead Data Central in Dayton, Ohio. They offered remote access by dial up modem to one terabyte of text stored on an acre of mainframe computers running Unix. The hardware and software to store that one terabyte of text was worth over US$100 million. Now, for US$64, I can store one terabyte of data on my portable drive on my desk.

To survive, hardware and software companies either need to figure out how to be the absolute lowest cost provider of a commodity good or service, or they need to dominate a value added branded niche so effectively that when a lower cost alternative inevitable appears the perceived cost of switching away from the dominant brand outweigh the benefits. We'll briefly cover the largest survivors of this Darwinian struggle organized by what layer of the information technology stack they primarily focus on. These are the 20 or so companies that provide most of the core technologies for big data.

Information technology infrastructure is often described in terms of a stack. Our very simplified IP stack has only three layers: at the base, hardware, computers and routers, in the middle, databases and enterprise software and at the top, desktop commercial software.

At the base of the stack is hardware, chips and other components assembled into machines, servers, and routers. At this level are semi-conductor chip companies led by Intel with revenues of US$55 billion, and also including Texas Instruments with revenues of US$13 billion, and AMD with revenues of US$4.6 billion. Cisco, the leading provider of Internet routers, has revenues of US$49 billion.

A very unusual hardware company is Apple, with revenues of US$224 billion, the largest IT company in the world. In fact, by market capitalization, Apple is twice as big as the world's next largest company, ExxonMobil. Apple is famous for its successful control of the entire stack from chips and monitors through the operating system, applications' look and feel, mobile devices and all the way to proprietary value-added services like iTunes and its own cloud storage.

In the middle layer of the stack are enterprise, scalable operating systems, web server software, big relational and distributed databases, and of course, big enterprise software applications. This is software only professionals interact with. User-friendly interfaces tend to be non-existent, and little if any thought is given to making the projects intuitive or easy to use. The primary goal at this layer is scalability, and of course security. Leaders at the enterprise software level are IBM with revenues of US$86 billion, primarily focused on building enterprise systems for companies; then Oracle with revenues of US$38 billion for large databases that can handle high simultaneous traffic, and for enterprise software in the human resources, customer relationship management, finance and supply chain segments. Next, SAP which has US$21 billion in revenues for supply chain and finance systems. A smaller player and one of Oracle's last surviving competitors in commercial databases is Teradata with US$2.7 billion in revenues. Symantec, which makes enterprise security software, had US$6.7 billion in revenues. VMware, which makes enterprise software that allows multiple operating systems and concurrent users on a single machine's hardware, had US$6 billion in revenues.

An interesting hybrid company offering very complex enterprise-level software to manage all aspects of customer relationship management and the sale process, but offering their software exclusively as a hosted service, is www.salesforce.com with US$4.1 billion in revenues.

Then comes the third layer; user-friendly commercial desktop software applications that allow knowledge workers to access and work with company data. This level is currently dominated by Microsoft with revenues of US$86 billion for Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint and the rest. Slightly more technical statistics and modeling packages include SAS, with revenues of approximately US$4 billion, and MATLAB, which is privately held, owned by MathWorks, with approximately US$750 million in revenues. Also data visualization tools like Tableau with revenues of US$468 million, and digital imaging process tools like Adobe Photoshop with revenues of US$4.35 {billion}.

All these hardware and software companies have big data strategies. Microsoft is moving into the hosted software as a service space that is currently dominated by Amazon web services. IBM and Oracle both have cloud offerings. IBM even hosts SAP enterprise applications in the cloud. All of these companies are trying to remake themselves as offering just-in-time and real-time data for human or computer driven decision making. Most have extensive machine learning and predictive analytics initiatives, for example, IBM's Watson and Microsoft's Azure projects.